Crucible Essay
JC
11th
In “The Crucible” written by Arthur Miller, John Proctor is seen making hard choices during the Salem witch trials. This essay looks at whether John Proctor was more selfish or selfless and a villain or a hero. John Proctor is a farmer in Salem, in between the witch trials he’s known for being strong and independent. As more deaths happen. because of the trial he must make choices that affect his life and the others around him. John Proctor mostly helps others instead of being selfish and ends up becoming a hero despite his mistakes.

One way we see Proctor being selfless is when he admits to having an affair with Abigail Williams. This could save his life, but it also means he must confess to his mistakes, which is embarrassing. In Act 3 he says  "A man won't throw away his good name, you know that.” Proctor is ready to give up his honor to tell the truth and protect his wife Elizabeth.

Another example of Proctor helping others is when he refuses to sign a false confession in Act 4, even though it could save his life and put the blame on innocent people. He says, "I can, and it's surprising, but now I think I see some goodness in John Proctor" . Proctor won't go along with the lies, showing he values doing the right thing over saving himself.

Proctor's biggest act of help is when he chooses to hang rather than lie about being a witch. In the end, he rips up his confession, saying, "Because it's my name! I can't live without it. I've given you my soul; let me keep my name". This moment shows Proctor's heroism in standing up against the corrupt authorities and staying true to his principles, even if it costs him his life.


Some might say Proctor's affair with Abigail was a selfish act that started all the trouble. While that's true, it's important to remember that he does take responsibility for his actions and tries to make things right in the end.


In "The Crucible," John Proctor comes across as a complex character who mostly helps others instead of himself. He's willing to admit his mistakes, protect innocent people, and even give up his life to stand for the truth and his reputation. This makes him a hero in a story filled with villains. Proctor's journey from making mistakes to doing the right thing is a powerful lesson in the play.

